---
title: "Co-existence of bla NDM-5 and tet(X4) in international high-risk E. coli clone ST648 of Human origin in China"
collection: publications
publication_type: Research Article
permalink:
excerpt: ""
date: 2022-10-13
venue: "Frontiers in Microbiology"
paperurl: false
citation: false
authors: "Muhammad Shafiq, Mi Zeng, Budi Permana, Hazrat Bilal, John Anderson, Fen Yao, Abdelazeem M. Algammal, Xin Li, Yumeng Yuan1 and Xiaoyang Jiao1."
---

**Abstract**  
The emergence of pathogens conferring resistance to last-resort therapies like tigecycline, colistin, and carbapenems limiting the therapeutic options and raising concerns about the emergence of new "superbugs". The current study reports the first incident of a blaNDM-5 and tet(X4) co-harboring E. coli with resistance to carbapenem and tigecycline recovered as causative agent of a urinary tract infection in a 94-year-old patient. The E. coli strain ECCL209 carries multiple resistance genes (i.e., blaTEM-1B, blaNDM-5, blaCMY-2, aadA22, florR, erm(B), mph(A), erm(42), lnuG, qnrS1, and sul2), and exhibits resistance to almost all clinically used antibiotics. MLST analysis found that the strain belongs to ST648, considered as a worldwide high-risk pandemic clone. Moreover, multiple plasmid incompatibility types were detected, i.e., IncHI1A, IncHI1B, IncFII, IncFIA, IncFIB, IncQ1, Col, IncX4. Genetic analysis revealed that blaNDM-5 and tet(X4) genes were localized on two hybrid plasmids with multiple replicons. Continuous monitoring studies are suggested to quantify the antimicrobial resistance and assess the dissemination of such superbugs into a human health care setting.

**The paper is available** [here](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1031688/abstract)

**Recommended citation:** Shafiq M, Zeng M, Permana B, Bilal H, Huang J, Yao F, Algammal AM, Li X, Yuan Y, Jiao X. Coexistence of blaNDM-5 and tet(X4) in international high-risk Escherichia coli clone ST648 of human origin in China. Front Microbiol. 2022 Nov 10;13:1031688. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1031688. PMID: 36439817; PMCID: PMC9685555.
